---
title: "Integrating your own gym environments with Hugging Face's LeRobot"
date: 2025-02-25
permalink: /posts/2025/02/integrating-gym-lerobot/
tags:
  - robotics
  - reinforcement learning
  - machine learning
  - lerobot
---

# Using Custom Gym Environments with Hugging Face’s LeRobot 🚀

[LeRobot](google.com) is a cool project for robotics reinforcement and imitation learning
that I've been playing around with for a few months
now. LeRobot comes with several built-in simulation environments and policies, but since its
stated goal is to be used as a library, I wanted to try my hand at integrating my own environments
and policies. So this blog post will be the first step: integrating a custom environment.

## Why Integrate Custom Environments into LeRobot?

Instead of writing all your own training code to use a custom environment, with LeRobot you can
take advantage of:

- **standardized configurations** for training agents that other people can read and replicate
- **existing training scripts** and tools
- **Easily integrate with Hugging Face’s ecosystem**, including model sharing and benchmarking on the Hub

## Overview of the Approach

The main steps to integrating a new environment are:

1. **Wrapping the original environment:** LeRobot expects environments to have a specific interface. We create a thin wrapper around `HoverAviary`
    to match this interface.
2. **Registering the environment:** We use Gymnasium’s registration API to make our custom environment discoverable by `gymnasium`.
3. **Providing a configuration via a dataclass:** This ensures that the environment’s parameters (like FPS, task type, and action configuration) are easily adjustable through
    LeRobot's command-line scripts.
4. **Making the config discoverable by LeRobot** ...

# First Environment: `Pendulum-v1`

First, let's try to use LeRobot with the simple yet famous environment from gymnasium: `Pendulum-v1`, which is an RL staple (why?).
LeRobot is built to use both state observations and image observations directly -- for now, we will
keep it simple and use only state observations from the environment.

## Step 1: Wrapping the original environment

The built-in gym `Pendulum-v1` differs from the format LeRobot expects in a few ways:

1. LeRobot expects observations from the environment to be a **dictionary** that contains different types
   of observations, e.g. the state of the agent, the state of the environment, images, etc. In the specific
   case of the agent's state, it appears to expect this observation to correspond to a key `agent_pos` in the dict.
   For `Pendulum-v1`, we are only working with the state of the agent (there is no distinction between the agent
   and the environment in this case). So, we need to do the following:
   a. We have to update the `observation` method to return a dict with the observations under the key `agent_pos`
   b. We have to update the `observation_space` attribute of the environment to match the return type of the observation (now a dict)
2. The `info` dict returned by the `step()` method must contain the key `is_success` on each step, with a boolean value indicating
   whether the episode is a success or not. For the case of the pendulum, we won't be using this parameter for training, so we can
   arbitrarily make it always False for now.

`gymnasium` already has some nice wrapper classes (`gym.Wrapper`, `gym.ObservationWrapper`, etc.) that we
can subclass to wrap the `observation` and `step` methods to provide dict outputs:


create a new python file somewhere:

```python
class LeRobotWrapper(gym.Wrapper):
    def __init__(self, env: gym.Env) -> None:
        super().__init__(env)
        self.observation_space = Dict({"agent_pos": self.env.observation_space})

    def observation(self, obs: np.ndarray) -> dict[str, np.ndarray]:
        return {"agent_pos": obs}

    def step(self, action: np.ndarray) -> tuple[dict, float, bool, bool, dict]:
        obs, reward, terminated, truncated, info = self.env.step(action)
        info["is_success"] = False  # Always False for now
        return self.observation(obs), float(reward), terminated, truncated, info

    def reset(
        self,
        *,
        seed: int | None = None,
        options: dict[str, Any] | None = None,
    ) -> tuple[dict, dict]:
        obs, info = self.env.reset(seed=seed, options=options)
        return self.observation(obs), info
```

## Step 2: Registration with `gym`

Now that we have our new (modified) environment, we have to _register_ it with `gymnasium`. This
allows us to instantiate the environment by calling `gym.make('name_of_the_environment')`, which
is what LeRobot calls under the hood to spawn an environment.

We can register by adding the following lines below our new environment:

```python
register(
    id="gym_pendulum_v1/Pendulum-v1",
    entry_point=lambda **kwargs: LeRobotDictWrapper(gym.make("Pendulum-v1", **kwargs)),
)
```

## Step 3: Config


LeRobot uses Python dataclasses alongside the
[draccus](https://github.com/dlwh/draccus) library to simplify configuration
management. Using dataclasses allows for better typing and checking in Python,
and draccus allows us to easily use the command line to pass arguments to these
dataclasses.

Let's look at the base configuration class for simulation environments in LeRobot:

```python
@dataclass
class EnvConfig(draccus.ChoiceRegistry, abc.ABC):
    task: str | None = None
    fps: int = 30
    features: dict[str, PolicyFeature] = field(default_factory=dict)
    features_map: dict[str, str] = field(default_factory=dict)

    @property
    def type(self) -> str:
        return self.get_choice_name(self.__class__)

    @abc.abstractproperty
    def gym_kwargs(self) -> dict:
        raise NotImplementedError()
```

This class outlines several key parameters that all simulation environments must have:

* `task`: The name of the task
* `fps`: The frame rate controlling the simulation and rendering.
* `features`
* `features_map`: Dictionaries that define policy features and their mapping to
  environment observations/actions.
* `gym_kwargs`: A property that aggregates configuration parameters into a
  dictionary, which is then passed directly to your Gym environment.
  these go directly to gym.make therefore should have max_episode_steps and then
  kwargs for the env constructor
* The `type` property is special and we will see how it is used in a second

Therefore, the first step to porting a new environment is to subclass
`EnvConfig` and define these parameters. For our case, we end up with:


```python
@EnvConfig.register_subclass("pendulum_v1")
@dataclass
class PendulumV1Env(EnvConfig):
    task: str = "Pendulum-v1"
    fps: int = 30
    episode_length: int = 200
    obs_type: str = "state"
    render_mode: str = "rgb_array"
    features: dict[str, PolicyFeature] = field(
        default_factory=lambda: {
            "action": PolicyFeature(type=FeatureType.ACTION, shape=(1,)),
            "state": PolicyFeature(type=FeatureType.STATE, shape=(3,)),
        }
    )
    features_map: dict[str, str] = field(
        default_factory=lambda: {
            "action": ACTION,
            "state": OBS_ROBOT,
        }
    )

    @property
    def gym_kwargs(self) -> dict:
        return {
            "render_mode": self.render_mode,
            "max_episode_steps": self.episode_length,
        }
```


## Step 4: Using the environment with LeRobot

Now we have all our ingredients.
right now LeRobot doesn't support online learning, it only supports imitation learning
which means we need a dataset to train a policy
to test our environment we will create a dataset with random actions
then we will test training on it
even though the policy will be bad this will tell us if our environment works
* can make a dataset
* policy's outputs are right format for environment
* environment's outputs are right format for policy

```python
# Do dataset loop here
```

# Second Environment: `gym-pybullet-drones`

Next, we'll integrate a sim I knew well from my MSc thesis: [HoverAviary](https://github.com/utiasDSL/gym-pybullet-drones)
from the `gym_pybullet_drones` package (the lab where I did my MSc thesis wrote the env).


## Code Walkthrough

### 0. setup env

describe UV setup here and installing lerobot

### 1. Creating the LeRobot Configuration Dataclass

LeRobot leverages Python's dataclasses alongside the
[draccus](https://github.com/dlwh/draccus) library to simplify configuration
management, more on draccus in a second

```python
@dataclass
class EnvConfig(draccus.ChoiceRegistry, abc.ABC):
    task: str | None = None
    fps: int = 30
    features: dict[str, PolicyFeature] = field(default_factory=dict)
    features_map: dict[str, str] = field(default_factory=dict)

    @property
    def type(self) -> str:
        return self.get_choice_name(self.__class__)

    @abc.abstractproperty
    def gym_kwargs(self) -> dict:
        raise NotImplementedError()
```

This class outlines several key parameters:

* `task`: The name of the task (e.g., "hover" for drone simulation).
* `fps`: The frame rate controlling the simulation and rendering.
* `features`
* `features_map`: Dictionaries that define policy features and their mapping to
  environment observations/actions.
* `gym_kwargs`: A property that aggregates configuration parameters into a
  dictionary, which is then passed directly to your Gym environment.
  these go directly to gym.make therefore should have max_episode_steps and then
  kwargs for the env constructor
* The `type` property is special and we will see how it is used in a second

Therefore, the first step to porting a new environment is to subclass
`EnvConfig` and define these parameters. For our case, we end up with:


```python
@EnvConfig.register_subclass("pybullet_drones")
@dataclass
class PybulletDronesEnv(EnvConfig):
    task: str = "hover"
    fps: int = 30
    episode_length: int = 200
    render_mode: str = "rgb_array"
    act_type: ActionType = ActionType.ONE_D_RPM
    features: dict[str, PolicyFeature] = field(
        default_factory=lambda: {
            "action": PolicyFeature(type=FeatureType.ACTION, shape=()),
            "state": PolicyFeature(type=FeatureType.STATE, shape=()),
        }
    )
    features_map: dict[str, str] = field(
        default_factory=lambda: {
            "action": ACTION,
            "state": OBS_ROBOT,
        }
    )

    @property
    def gym_kwargs(self) -> dict:
        return {
            "ctrl_freq": self.fps,
            "max_episode_steps": self.episode_length,
            "render_mode": self.render_mode,
            "act": self.act_type,
        }

    def __post_init__(self) -> None:
        # Adjust action shape based on act_type
        if self.act_type == ActionType.ONE_D_RPM:
            action_shape = (1,)
        elif self.act_type == ActionType.RPM:
            action_shape = (4,)
        else:
            raise ValueError(f"Unsupported act_type: {self.act_type}")  # noqa: TRY003
        self.features["action"].shape = action_shape
        # there is a 0.5s action buffer in the observation and the state is 12-dimensional
        self.features["state"].shape = (self.fps // 2 * action_shape[0] + 12,)
```

The first key thing to note is the line:
```python
@EnvConfig.register_subclass("pybullet_drones")
```
Here we see why we use draccus in the first place. This allows draccus to find
the right `EnvConfig` subclass based on cmd-line args:

```python
@parser.wraps()
def create_cfg(cfg: EnvConfig):
    print(type(cfg))
    print(cfg.gym_kwargs)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    create_cfg()

# outputs:
# ::: something
```

The rest of the Pybullet Drones config subclass adapts the base configuration for a PyBullet
drones environment. Notice the use of the __post_init__ method, which adjusts
dependent parameters (like the action shape) after the initial instantiation.


### 2. Environment API

We start by subclassing `HoverAviary` to build our custom environment:

* need `{"agent_pos": obs}` dict obs
* render should return rgb array if you want videos
* observation space should also be dict
* info["is_success"] = False

if your env does not follow this which it almost certainly doesn't you can
make a wrapper or subclass the env

### 3. Register the env
